<!-- markdownlint-enable require-heading-body -->
<div markdown="1">
<style>
    :root { --section-number: 3; --section-style: decimal; }
</style>

# Commenter Responsibilities {.body}

## Overview {.body}

### General {.body}

Comments on projects using the ITS Open-Source Process are always welcome, no
matter how seemingly major or minor. Comments are key to improving products. The
ITS Open-Source Process is designed to facilitate and encourage users to submit
comments and therefore the commenting process is kept simple.

Within the ITS Open-Source Process, comments can be submitted in either the
discussions or issues tab of the project repository.

### Discussions {.body}

The discussions tab provides an open forum where interested parties can discuss
ideas, ask and answer questions, and formulate ideas. The discussions tab does
not directly propose any change to the project but can often nurture ideas that
ultimately result in refining the overall vision of the project, identify
problems or ambiguities in the project contents, develop consensus on project
priorities, etc.  

Discussions can be started by anyone at any time. Discussions can result in
refining the concept of one or more issues before formally submitting
them as issues.

### Issues {.body}

Every project should follow a plan. Within the ITS Open-Source Process, the plan
is documented by defining issues that are to be addressed, preferably according
to assigned priorities.

The issues tab provides an open forum where any interested party can propose
specific issues that need to be addressed by project contributors.  The issues
can be anything from a missing comma to requesting an entirely new feature. All
proposed changes to a project are supposed to be initiated by submitting an
issue.

When an issue is submitted, the project maintainer is responsible for triaging
the issue. Triaging includes reviewing the issue, determining if the issue fits
within the project plan, potentially parsing or merging the issue to create
easily manageable tasks, assigning appropriate priority and tags (e.g., bug,
ambiguity, editorial) to the issue, and gaining consensus on the approach. This
process can involve working with others on the project team to ensure consensus
on the decisions being made.

Once an issue has been reviewed and accepted, anyone can claim ownership of the
issue and begin resolving it. Given the complexities of version control when
there are potentially multiple contributors, it is wise to separate issues into
distinct bite-sized tasks that can be addressed with a reasonably short
turn-around.

## Submitting a Comment {.body}

### Read the README file {.body}

Before commenting, commenters **should** be familiar with the project as
documented in the README file.

### Respect the CODE_OF_CONDUCT {.body}

When commenting, commenters **shall** respect the rules within the
CODE_OF_CONDUCT file.</p>

### Use discussions if no change is proposed {.body}

For comments that do not actively propose a specific change to the project, the
commenter **shall** initiate a discussion using the project's discussion
template.

### Use issues to propose changes {.body}

For comments that actively propose a specific change to the project, the
commenter **shall** submit an issue using the project's appropriate issue
template (e.g., bug fix, documentation improvement, new feature)

### Comply with templates {.body}

The commenter **shall** comply with all instructions on the selected commenting
template without deleting any fields.

!!! note
    Inclusion of all fields facilitates processing of the comment and prevents
    automatic rejection. If a section of the template is not applicable, either
    explain why it is not needed or write "N/A".

!!! tip
    The specific templates offered can vary from project to project, but the
    templates often include the following fields:

    - **Title:** A short descriptive phrase to allow readers to quickly assess the
     comment
    - **Description:** The details of the comment, especially those not captured
     in other fields of the template. If you wish to work on the issue that you 
     are submitting, you should indicate this in the description. However, you 
     should not start this work until the issue has been triaged to ensure it 
     fits with the overall project plan. When reporting a bug, the description 
     needs to be sufficiently detailed so that the reader can reproduce the 
     anomaly.

</div>
